---
title: German-Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry Inc.
date: 2016-07-09T17:56:17PHT
excerpt: Founded in 2008 to support the growth of the Philippine economy through partnership and collaboration.
layout: post
datestart:  2016-07-09
dateend:    2016-07-09
categories: [company]
tags: 
published: true
permalink: /info/company/20160709T175617
link: 20160709T175617
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
---

Identified as one of the Next-11 countries, the Philippines is considered as one of the upcoming, largest and fastest growing economies.

The German-Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry Inc. (GPCCI) sees an undiscovered potential here. 

Since our foundation in 2008 we are determined to support the growth of the Philippine economy. We promote bilateral trade by supporting the market entry of German companies and represent Germany as strongest economic partner from Europe.

We strongly believe in upholding our mission to serve as a working platform for the German business community and promote German companies, products and services.

1. Official Representation of German Companies
AHKs are the key players of German foreign business development on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. They represent German business interests in their countries and they inform about and promote Germany as business location.

2. Member Organizations
AHKs are member organizations for companies actively involved in the bilateral business relations. These members give them the authority needed when interacting with politics, business and administration in terms of promoting the bilateral business relations.

3. Service Providers to Companies
Under the brand "DEinternational" AHKs provide services to companies both from Germany and their host countries in order to support their foreign business activities.

[Official website](http://philippinen.ahk.de/)

&#x25cf;
