---
title: DENR Suspends 2 Mining Firms in Zambales
date: 2016-07-09T14:33:48UTC
excerpt: The Department of Environment and Natural Resources suspended two nickel mining firms in Zambales on 7 July due to alleged environmental crimes, violation of mining and environmental laws.
layout: post
categories: [business, mining]
tags: [industry, mining, nickel, denr, suspension]
published: true
permalink: /:path
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
video:
  layout: top | bottom
  source: 
  attribution: 
---


The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) has suspended two nickel mining firms in Zambales; Zambales Diversified Metals Corporation (ZDMC) and the Benguetcorp Nickel Mines, Inc, (BNMI).
According to the Mines and Geosciences Bureau (MGB) Director Leo Jasareno, the suspension of the two mining companies stemmed from "various alleged environmental crimes, violations of the mining and environmental laws, and complaints of various groups against the alleged environmental impacts" of their mining operations.

The suspension letter, dated 7 July 2016, that was addressed to the president of the two mining companies referred to the Writ of Kalikasan issued by the Supreme Court in the case filed by the Concerned Citizens of Santa Cruz, Zambales against the mining operations in Zambales, Executive Order No. 01 issued by the Provincial Government of Zambales suspending the said mining operations and the complaints filed by various private groups.

The letter also ordered the two companies to comply with the conditions cited, among which are to address the issues arising from the tree-cutting and earthballing operations, the completion of construction of an exclusive mine haul road, rehabilitation of mined-out and open areas, and the full deposit of the Final Mine Rehabilitation/Decommissioning Funds.
It also directed the rehabilitation and compensation of all owners of farmlands, fishponds and water bodies adversely affected by the mining operations, and the repair of all damaged portions of roads as a result of hauling operations.

The DENR will audit the mining operations of both firms to determine compliance with the mining and environmental laws.

In 2014, the DENR also suspended two other nickel mines in Zambales; the LNL Archipelago Minerals, lnc. and Eramen Minerals, Inc.
All four large-scale mining operations in Zambales are now suspended.
&#x25cf; [DENR]
