---
title: Mariano Breaks Open Welded DAR Gates
date: 2016-07-06T18:55:59UTC
excerpt: The new Department of Agrarian Reform Secretary opened the welded and chained gates of the DAR building which has been closed for 18 years to communicate the intent of the new administration and welcome farmers and protesters.
layout: post
categories: [agriculture]
tags: 
published: true
permalink: /:path
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
video:
  layout:
  source: 
  attribution: 
---

Kilusang Magbubukid ng Pilipinas (KMP), of which Mariano is a founding member and former chair, used to stage protests outside the gates of the Department of Agrarian Reform building on Elliptical Road in Quezon City.
Mariano said, "Farmers led by the KMP stayed here for more than a week before the Jan. 22, 1987, Mendiola Massacre.”
The gates were shut, chained and welded to keep out protesters and "protect" the employees inside.
After 18 years, the driveway gates were broke open by the department's new Secretary, Rafael Mariano.

Aside from KMP, Secretary Mariano was also president of Anakpawis party-list and chair of Bagong Alyansang Makabayan.
He was one of the National Democratic Front (NDF) nominees for Cabinet position submitted to then president-elect Rodrigo Duterte.

Now that the gates are opened, he said, "This symbolizes that DAR, on all levels, will maintain open. We will follow a policy of continuing open and productive dialogues between the officials and employees of DAR and other stakeholders of agrarian reform, especially our farmers and agricultural workers, and advocates."
Watchers can only surmise how deep those actions and words run with those who have waited and fought for the land.
"This serves to remove all fences, walls between the officials and employees of DAR, and our stakeholders," Mariano said.

All farmers and even protesters are welcome to the DAR.
"If anyone comes to the agency, if there are any rallies, pickets or demonstrations in front of the office, let us not worry. Our farmers come here to the DAR for a reason. Let us welcome them," Mariano said to the DAR employees.
&#x25cf;
