---
title: Transcript of Speech During Oathtaking of New Appointees
date: 2016-09-25T12:06:39UTC
excerpt: President Rodrigo Duterte leads the Oathtaking of newly appointed Officials at Heroes Hall, Malacañang September 12, 2016.
layout: post
categories: [president]
tags: [oath taking, speech, transcript]
published: true
redirect_from: /news/20160925T120639
permalink: /news/Ojq1NM6LlWJQlwx
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
video:
  layout: [top | bottom]
  source: 
  attribution: 
sources:
  - label:
    link:
---

###### SPEECH OF PRESIDENT RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

###### DURING THE OATH TAKING OF NEWLY APPOINTED OFFICIALS

###### Heroes Hall, Malacañang

###### September 12, 2016

You know, you are now entering into the service of the government and there are a few things you must understand why it works this way and not that way. 

Alam mo, I ran on a platform of no graft, less crime, suppress the drug problem which has gotten out of hand or is this getting out of hands still, but we've been able to minimize at least the crime on streets to the barest minimum.
 
I do not promise you perfect peace because this is not heaven, but I commit myself to do everything not to compromise the next generation. If we have the numbers of three—as PDEA said three years ago when I was not the President of the Philippines, and you will just put it at a very liberal incremental increase, that's about the 700,000 that has surrendered and sought rehabilitation, that number is staggering and it scares you. Because if I do not interdict this problem now, I am not pulling my own chair but I would say, nobody can do it if you just look at the horizon of politicians, thereabout. Walang makakaya nito kung ang susunod na Presidente, iyon lang rin nakikita ninyo, ito rin ang tatakbo. You are in a hell hole ka diyan. So, tingin ko, since wala naman akong ambisyon maging Barangay Captain ulit, I'm the President without re-election, I might as well just do it my way, bahala na sila, but—kayong sa gobyerno, I appointed you, then you must understand how it is to me.
 
Alam mo isa lang ang bayan ko, and for all of my—ako pa iyong pinili ng Diyos na maging Presidente itong natapos na eleksiyon. I do not claim any greatness. I do not have special credentials. As a matter of fact, hindi ko kayo pinapatawa, it took my 7 years to finish high school. And you know, I just—until my father died and the cold realization that life is getting to be dangerous for me. And that was the time but has able to—you know, I am a grandson of a Moro Maranao Lady. Ang Lola ko Chinese ko—ah! ang Lola ko Maranao, Lolo ko Chinese. Tatay ko talagang Cebuano, and since we traced our linage in accordance with my fathers. Ang sinasabi ko, pag tinatanong niya ako't, "Ano ka?" "Bisaya." But look, I never stayed in the Visayas even for a day. Ang ano ko lang dito is, iyong nakita mo iyong sa speech ko, I will fight crime, drugs, and corruption. I did not include, mind you, if you still remember, the Mindanao issue in relation to public order and safety, kasi nandiyan na. As a matter of fact, one of the strongest reason that impelled me to run was nobody, even just for a statement na ano, well, to be talking about Mindanao. And Mindanao would never heal. Ako, pinadalhan ko ng dagdag ng ano, but it is really masakit sa akin to kill a Moro at to kill a Filipino for that matter. Kaya, I sought early to have peace with the communists. We are talking, maybe in the fullness of God's time, we will succeed. We have connected with the MI, they are talking. As a matter of fact, they are helping us in the war against drugs. By the way, I did not say that I'm going to just pursue and prosecute, I declared war sa droga kasi hindi ito madala ng pulis-pulisan lang. So, I raised that to the level of a national security threat which is really is, and called upon the Army and the Military to assist.
 
The MI is assisting us. We should be thankful for that. Ngayon, nandito naman iyong—si Nur—well, Nur blow hot and cold, but apparently he has close control of some of the factions there. For example, iyong Abu Sayyaf is no longer—so I have to navigate the stormy waters of that area there where I can find a formula.
 
Bakit galit? Well, in 1521 when Magellan landed in Leyte, Mindanao was already 100 % Islam. We were part the Sri-Visayas Empire of the Malay race. Kaya lang we revered the leader there, not by really the force of arms but the blood.
 
Noong dumating ang Espanyol pinilit nila kunin ang Mindanao and they knew that there were already Islam people there. Lahat Islam na, by 100 years ahead. Ngayon, gustong pinilit nila, and there were massacres. Then came the Americans because of the Spanish-American War, the Spaniards lost and one of the concessions that were given to the Americans by the Spaniards was to cede the Marianas, Guam, kaya nga ang pangalan nila diyan, Pilipino eh, and the Philippines, to include Mindanao. 

Mindanao resisted the Spaniards because they brought with them the religion, Christianity, then they bought the people there. Then, they unleashed their canons for those who did not obey and so Visayas, with sprinkling of a Moro—few Moro resettlements surrendered, hanggang Maynila. But Mindanao, because of its contiguous, hindi naman kalat kagaya ng Visayas, so walang top honcho. Mindanao stood and what was really the rallying point there? Islam. So, ngayon I have to face the Muslim secessionist threat, I have to deal with the Communist. I have to deal with the Abu Sayyaf and that's going to be a problem.
 
Now, why? Despite or in spite the passage of so many illustrious leaders, sila Pendaton noon, sila si—many others. Bakit? Bakit mahirap? Why does despite of the billions poured by Marcos noon hanggang ngayon. Kung titignan mo diyan sa Public Works Office, kung lahat naibuhos doon, talagang totoo iyong mga appropriations na iyon, amount to be millions, the highways of Basilan would have crisscrossed already. Pag idugtong-dugtong mo, aabot na ng Mindanao Island iyan. Why? Why is there not really no desire to—just get the money and spend it either wastefully or pocketed. Ganoon naman lahat ng politiko, not only the Moro. Mga Congressional ano diyan, insertions.
 
Why? Can I have the—saan si Bong? Hindi ako nag-iintriga sa inyo. Ang akin lang kasi, ang Amerika napaka-hipokrito. They know, actually know that I have a serious problem here, 3 million plus for the Philippines, 4 million for Widodo of Indonesia. So we discussed this problem, "Paano ito, adre? Nagkiki-crisscross ang droga dito sa atin, not only that the Jemaah Islamiyah sometimes visit us here, paputukin kami. Tapos naman sa inyo, diyan sa down town mismo, nagratratan kayo." Eh sabi niya, "well, we'll just have to help each other." Tapos sabi niya noon, "Nandiyan si mga—coffee, nandiyan kami." Kaibigan ko lahat eh, except dalawang—
 
Ako, ayaw kong itong—hindi. Bakit ang Amerikano, despite also or in spite also of giving the money—
 
This is really the massacre of Jolo, Bud Dajo. Look at the bodies there. Paano tayo magka—paano tayo paano mag—. For as long as we stay with America, we will never have peace in that ano—might as well give it up, give it an independent, not only in Jolo, andiyan si Ahmad Alonto, who was also appointed sa Mindanao Chairmanship. Maranao marami rin, sa Lanao. Pero walang Moro na nagsasalita nito ha, ever since. No Moro leader confronted eyeball-to-eyeball the Filipino. Bakit hind natin—but they know, mahiya lang sabihin. Alam nila lahat diyan na matagalan ‘to. For as long as you stay with the west, ayan mga military oh. May isa hinahanap ko iyong isang ano dito, post card pa, ginawang post card, nakatindig sa suso ng babae, nakaganoon ang baril. Ginawang post card mayroon iyan. Alam niyo, saan namin nakuha ito? Sa archives ng Amerika. Kaya iyong mga special forces, they have to go, they have to go in Mindanao, maraming mga puti doon, they have to go. Re-orient ko iyong foreign policy. Hindi ko lang masalita noon, out of respect or I do not want a rift with America, but they have to go. Dito sa mapa. Mas lalong iinit, pagkakita ng Amerikano iyan, patayin talaga iyan. Kukunan ng ransom iyan, patayin.
 
Even if you are a black or a white American, basta Amerikano ka. Kaya iyong, sino iyong isang naano, kung Pilipino ka, medyo palakihan lang ng ano, pero nagalit ako, when the last time not because he was a Christian, I'm a Christian, I'm a Muslim, basta saan lang ako mag-ano magsimba, kung nandiyan iyong—if it's a Friday and I'm there, I go to the Mosque and pray. Kung sa simbahan ako mag-abot, well basta walang pari, I do not want to listen sa—do not moralize on me, kagaya ka sa mga—
 
So, itong Amerika, una binanatan ako, sinong bumibira, iyong Amerikanong sabi nila rapporteur dito, and threatening me, bringing me to the International Court of Justice. Tapos si Ban Ki-moon, ‘maya nagsalita si—about Human Rights. Iyong tapos ang sagot ko, lahat na, ganoon iyon. But iyong sinabi kong minura ko siya, I swear to Allah, I never mentioned his name. Sabi ko, "huwag ninyong gawin yan, and you review the tapes, huwag ninyong gawin sa akin iyan. Kasi pag hindi ninyo ako—ninyo akong bababuyin." Ang hinihintay ko doon, si Ban Ki-moon, pati siya si Obama. Pero I never mentioned a name, but they responded hurting words. 

You know, Mr. Obama, when you accuse me of killing which you do not have also the facts, anyway, whether legitimately killed in an encounter with the police, although simply murdered by their cohorts, wala ka ngang ipinakita. And you said, Duterte hurting words, words? You cannot even—you have not even apologized to the Filipino Nation. Why only to the Moro, are they not Filipinos also? It was just a question of religion, who came in first. But they are our all Malay brothers, our blood. And we knew, do not ask and ano, he who is without sin cast the first stone. Ang Iraq pumasok ang Britain pati America on this sole allegation that there were weapons of mass destruction. They killed Saddam because he was the strong man, and where is Iraq now? It is a failed country. Pinakialaman nilang Libya, they supported the rebels of Syria, look what happened, all failed states.
 
In Vietnam, 50,000 Americans, ipagbibida nila, but how many Vietnamese people died for nothing. Eventually, the Communist won but they created a ruckus here, somewhere. Vietnam is just across our shores. China is upper portion. Kaharap natin dito sa Luzon ang Vietnam, yung likod niya Thailand, then Cambodia, Laos. Ang mga Amerikano talaga.
 
So, why blabber about me? I know that you should know, you know, that I have a serious problem in my country. And you end up—why don't you just build a—rehab them, treat them? Putang, kaya ka magmura. Alam mo bakit? They know, and I know, and you know, na pumasok ako dito sa gobyerno midstream. Yung budget tapos na, the budget that we are working on now is the frame budget that was prepared the previous year by the Aquino. Wala namang nakita doon na danger about drugs. Because nobody, until I became President, that the naked truth came out that we are really a drug country. 

In Davao, I was very strict so there was a kind of a limited space for them. And besides, totoo yan. I tell it straight to them, sinabi ko, "pag ayaw niyong umalis talagang papatayin ko kayo." At pinatay ko. So what about—so what so ruckus, what your problem about killing people, criminals destroying the next generation? And that is the youth of your neighborhood. You are actually compromising, if you do not do anything now, the next generation of Filipinos. Because then, by that time, drugs would be uncontrolled and already would have it's widespread. So how many?  Newspaper keep on, the tabulation.
 
Ngayon isang libo, gawin mo ng sampung libo. Puro mga durugista. Saan ang drug lords? Hindi lang ninyo alam. Really want to know saan iyong drug lords na hindi taga rito? Ang drug lords dito hindi atin. I would not—not even bat an eyelash, mga Intsik. And they are now operating outside, they have this digital map of the Philippines and they can direct the operations. Iyong dito, ang mga naglaro sino? Mga pulis una ginoo, tang-ina. Tapos sabihin, maliit masyado ng problema because it's a simple matter. And you know, it's a medical issue, really? If it's a medical issue what we do now? What's we should do now about this 3 million? There all unaccounted. Iyong 700 lang nag-surrender kasi takot.
 
So, why? Anong sabi ng—sa interview ni ANC kahapon, sila Teddy Boy pati—... why most of them surfaced? Because they fear for their lives, that's the problem. In the Philippines, mayroon tayong death penalty noon, but because walang mga bayag ‘to and they do not have really the—they never implemented. Oh sasabihin ng mga congressman, "ire-restore mo iyong death penalty, eh nandiyan na iyan eh." Kita mo naman, kasi iyong mga lider, hindi talaga in-implement. Kung ako ang nag-lider noon at nilagay niya ako for the last 17 years, kaya hinihingi ko uli. Kaya the argument is—"wala, may death penalty noon, wala man. Walang namatay, wala man." Kasi walang—you removed actually the greatest, the essence of criminal law is the fear to violate law.
 
What prevailed was not the fear of the law, but the impunity and the absence of accountability. Kasi ‘pag general na, ‘pag governor na, ‘pag mayor na, walang maglapit kasi takot. Oh kita mo ako sinabi ko, "Bigyan mo iyan beinte kuwarto oras, papatayin ko kayong lahat." Eh ‘di governor ngayon takbuhan sila, pawis-pawis. Kasi walang takot, maski anong—however you bring the matter to a physical or medical or spiritual issue, for as long as the essence of fear is not there, fear of accountability, may papanagutan kaya gusto ko nga, death penalty. You answer for your deeds so that you will not be prevented, if you do it—alam mo, there are lawyers here. There are two theories of criminal law, criminality. One is the positivist theory, ito iyong sa Amerika na he can be rehabilitated, return to the mainstream of society. Oh dito mo nakikita, rapist, pasok, rape uli. Holdaper, labas. 

Ang atin, classical. Ako classical ako, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth – that's the basis. Nagkasala ka, kung may death penalty—kasalanan mo iyan. Kasalanan mo iyan, kasi batas eh. When we are only two or three or four or five, o isang barangay o isang siyudad, puwede iyang positivist theory mo, mga yan. The imported European, mga EU, na you cannot trade with them if there is a penalty of death sa mga criminal law books ‘no. Tignan mo ka-hipokrito.
 
It was Britain and America who entered there. Who divided by the way, the Middle East? It was France, America and Great Britain. They divided, they invaded it many times before. Got the control of their oil and the partition at iyong Iraq, Iran. Huwag na tayong magbolahan, ganoon. Sumakay itong si Obama, sumakay si Ban Ki-moon, dito sumakay. Alam mo kung kaninong laro ito? Oh, ayaw ko nang sabihin. Yellow iyan, dito na lang—anak, hindi ikaw ha. Iyong damit mo lang man. (laughter) Sorry ha, sorry. The dress has nothing to do with it. Sinakyan na nila, they're countering that if they can build a case against me, I'll be impeached. My God, I'll tell you frankly.
 
When I assumed office sabi ko, "In this quest of mine, I am prepared to lose my honor, my life and the presidency." It does not mean me anything. Even interferes with the basic principles of my life, my values are not good as yours. Iyan ang sabi mo, but it is my own value. I have a set of rules to live by. I've been true to that since I was a young prosecutor. I became a special Tanodbayan prosecutor for how many years. I became the vice mayor, mayor and mayor for 23 years, one time a congressman, and one time a vice mayor of my daughter. I'd like you to know that I have lived by the values that I have believed in Quran.
 
Dito, it will be a clean government. There will be no corruption, I will not tolerate it. ‘Pag hindi ko kaya, mag-resign ako. Pero patayin talaga kita muna. Bakit didilat-dilat ka, hinihiya mo ako eh. Now the reason my—I say, it's the fall of—ito, nandito si George. Bakit ko nilagay iyong mga sundalo? Alam mo ngayon, wala nang takot lang batas ‘to. Alam mo ginawa nila iyong sa Lotto, I'll tell you, diyan tayo binira nang husto. We lost almost billions and billions of peso, kasi iyang small time Lotto, tapos yung jueteng, ginanon nila. Isang operator lang iyan, nakuha nila iyong concession, sakto, marami iyang outlet diyan sa lotto, kanila iyan, started at—they merged it with the jueteng. So pareha lang man numbers, ihulog nila itong—ito, iyan lang ang kinita ng gobyerno. Kasi it is a case of manipulation. Simple naman, kaya ito kanila na. Hindi ‘to malalagyan mo iyan ng babae na honest and lalaki na, papatayin lang iyan.
 
Pilipino kayo. ‘Maya ma-ambush iyon ‘no. Sabi ko, dito kayo sa pulis muna. Lagay ko Marines, eh si George naman, "Eh kilala ko ‘tong mga generals na ito." Truthfully honest. I have observed it during my time, they were doing their—building their careers in Mindanao. Wala akong naririnig dito sa kanila na corruption. So sila ang kinuha ko. It's a very limited arena because sila rin nakilala ko noon. Maraming honest na military, the problem is I do not know them. So iyong mga honest na dumaan doon, iyong mga classmate ko sa dormitoryo dito pati iyong sa eskuwelahan ko, yun ang mga tao na—hindi naman ako imbitado dito sa Maynila na mga social gathering. I was nobody. Who would ever invite me doon sa debut ni debut na debut na debut. Wala kami noon, mahirap lang kami. Wala nga akong pakialam kung sino kami.
 
Pero Bud Dajo, just led me the first battle of Bud Dajo was known as the Bud Dajo  massacre, was a counter-insurgency action fought by the United States against the Moros, in March of 1906, during their rebellion phase of the Philippine-American War. Marami tayo eh, Spanish-American, Spanish-Filipinos, tapos Spanish-Americans, Americans-Filipinos. May giyera tayo sa kanila, so we claimed this because it was a war against—kanila ito eh. Kita mo—if you want, I'll give you, each and everyone, ah tutulo luha mo dito.
 
And who is protesting about the death of people with an encounter with the police? Of course, may mga tao talagang sinalvage, those who were not afforded any—extrajudicial, hindi namin trabaho iyan. Pero kung ako, noon, hindi ako makagalaw. Ako, anak ka ng sundalo, ako ang na-assign sa Mindanao, ang anak ko na-rape, namatay, hindi ako maka—walang lider na mag-ano, o ngayon pagdating ko. You—enough, enough, you—

Pag wala kayo niyan, I'll give you, 3 months to do it. Kung hindi, you're all out of the service. Sabi ko sa kanila, "Huwag mo kong—magsuweldo tapos wala kayong trabaho? Sige hanapin mo, and I end by saying that, you know, sila mismo ang mga abogado ng produkto ng West. Constant use of Shabu even after 6 months, it will shrink you progressively, everytime you do it, it shrinks your brain. Kung one year iyon, you are no longer viable for any rehabilitation. Wala na, tapos na. So kung itong mga 3 million na ito, mga gunggong ‘to, you have a choice of what? Patayin mo? Galigin mo? Ipakain mo na lang diyan sa mga hayop o we wait for the next budget.
 
Unang una, wala akong pera nasa budget man. Who'd ever realize, who could ever project that when I would come in and start pressing the buttons, they would come out by the hundreds of thousands. And we would be placed in a position, kaya ako nag-appreciate sa China. Sa isip ko, kayo lang rin ang nagdala dito, they are cooking it. Pag nagluto ka ng shabu diyan sa International Seas, pag naabutan ka ng mga cutter o Philippine Navy, sabihin ko, "Pasabugin mo, huwag kang matakot, we can always confront them," Letse kayo. You want your cake it too. Pasabugin mo, ganoon rin ang pinag-usapan namin ni Widodo, piracy. Piracy is a crime against humanity, wherever you are, when you're caught, you can be tried in that jurisdiction. Pasabugin mo, paano natin malaman? Eh di habulin mo muna. Pag nakita mo ganoon, if you see just a single, maski shot gun luma, pasabugin mo na. That's the agreement between Widodo: destroy the enemies of humanity.
 
Maraming salamat po.
&#x25cf;


