---
title: 120th Rizal Day
date: 2016-12-31T05:24:35UTC
excerpt: The President led the commemoration rites of Rizal Day on 30 December 2016 at 7:00 a.m. at the Rizal National Monument, Rizal Park, Manila.
layout: post
categories: [president]
tags: [Jose Rizal, Rizal Day, Rizal Shrine, martyrdom]
published: true
permalink: /news/ol7Rk4r5nzk3q5j
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
video:
  layout: top
  source: 1VoH_MBJfhk
  attribution: RTVM
sources:
  - label: RTVM
    link: http://rtvm.gov.ph/main/?p=45208
  - label: National Historical Commission of the Philippines
    link: http://nhcp.gov.ph/president-rodrigo-roa-duterte-leads-observance-120th-anniversary-martyrdom-dr-jose-rizal/
  - label: GMA News Online
    link: http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/594122/news/nation/duterte-leads-rizal-day-commemoration-rites
---

The President led the flag-raising and wreath-laying ceremonies in commemoration of the 120th anniversary of Dr. Jose Rizal's martyrdom and nationalism on 30 December 2016 at 7:00 a.m. at the Rizal National Monument, Rizal Park, Manila.

The President was given full military honors upon his arrival headed by the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) chief of staff Lt. Gen. Eduardo Año.
The President was joined in the raising of the Philippine flag by National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP) Acting Chairman and Commissioner Dr. Rene R. Escalante, NHCP Executive Director Ludovico D. Badoy, Manila City Mayor Joseph Ejercito Estrada, Supreme Commander of the Order of the Knights of Rizal Reynaldo S. Puno, and National Parks Development Committee (NPDC) Executive Director Penelope D. Belmonte.

The flag raising was done simultaneously with other historical sites in the country such as the Museo ni Jose Rizal in Calamba City, Laguna; the Museo ni Jose Rizal in Dapitan City, Zamboanga; and the Rizal Monument in Quezon City.
Mayor Justin Marc S.B. Chipeco is the guest of honor at the Calamba City commemorative rites while Councilor and Knights of Rizal Chapter Commander Alemarlou Bantilan Dagpin, KCR, is the guest of honor at the Rizal Shrine, Dapitan City.

The President was joined by Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea, Foreign Affairs Secretary Perfecto Yasay Jr., Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana, and Chief Presidential Legal Counsel Secretary Salvador Panelo. 

The President was greeted after the ceremony by some of the National Hero's descendants led by 1964 Miss International Gemma Cruz-Araneta.

The President later on visited the ongoing distribution of five wheelchairs donated by the Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) at the Noli Me Tangere area.

##### Brief History

On December 30, 1896, Rizal was shot at the age of 35 in Bagumbayan, now the Luneta National Park, after he was convicted of sedition, rebellion and conspiracy by the Spanish colonial government, and was sentenced to death by firing squad.

On December 20, 1898, General Emilio Aguinaldo declared December 30 as Rizal Day and a national day of mourning through a presidential decree that was written in Filipino and Spanish. The first celebration of Rizal Day was held at Club Filipino in San Juan City on 1898.

Rizal was declared the country's national hero in 1901 by American Governor General William Howard Taft, who was then appointed as chairman of the Second Philippine Commission, also known as the Taft Commission, by former American President William McKinley.

##### Message of the President

Today, we remember the martyrdom of our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal.

We are the fortunate recipient of the fruits of Rizal's sacrifices, the freedom that he fought for, and the self-identity and honor that he strongly believed we ought to defend. Beyond his prodigious and various talents, Rizal is best honored when we regard him as a beacon and moral compass in these challenging and perilous times.

As in his time, our country is still fighting for independence. But today, we are fighting for freedom from the bondage of poverty, crime, illegal drugs, and corruption. Indeed, they are our present enemies; they are the modern invaders that subjugate our people's hearts, minds, and spirits. The government needs the active involvement of all sectors to help us in this war to bring about genuine change in our society.

As our nation undergoes a significant phase of social development and economic growth, a period of national unity that calls for the cooperation, patience, and sacrifice of our people is necessary. Each of us should manifest the same fervor and dedication that moved and motivated Jose Rizal in action. Let us therefore emulate the traits of Rizal; let us be willing heroes — patriotic, faithful, and loyal to our Motherland.

This day of commemoration is a day of grateful remembrance of his martyrdom so that we may also awaken and become our own heroes — committed to advocate good governance and uphold the rule of law; steadfast to end criminality and all forms of government corruption; and compassionate to the plight of the poor and less privileged.

Sa ngalan ni Rizal, ituloy natin and sinimulang pagbabago. Mabuhay ang ating Inang Bayan!

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

MANILA<br>
30 December 2016
&#x25cf;
