---
title: PNP Chief PDG Ronald Dela Rosa
date: 2016-07-04T04:33:53UTC
excerpt: From humble beginnings in Davao del Sur and now that he is the 21st PNP Chief, Police Director General Ronald 'Bato' Dela Rosa never dreamed of being in his position now. He believes it must be destiny that placed him there and because he has a crucial job for his country.
layout: post
datestart:  2016-07-01
dateend:    2022-07-01
style: horizontal
categories: [info_feature]
tags: [pnp]
published: true
permalink: /feature/20160704T043353
link: 20160704T043353
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/47611946/duterte/post/pnp_chief_pdg_ronald_m_dela_rosa_300x.png
  attribution: RTVM
---

Dela Rosa rose from humble beginnings in this hometown of Bato, Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur and is a product of the public school system being a graduate of Bato Elementary School, Sta. Cruz National High School and Mindanao State University.

He is a member of the illustrious PMA "Sinagtala" Class of 1986.

He rose from junior officer to field grade officer while serving various assignments in Mindanao as Battalion Commander of the 11th Regional Mobile Group, Regional Intelligence Officer, Compostela Valley Provincial Director, Davao Del Sur Provincial Director and head of the Mindanao Satellite Office of the Presidential Anti-Organized Crime Task Force (PAOCTF).

He served with distinction as Regional Logistics Officer for Southern Mindanao in 2011-2012 and as City Director of the Davao City Police Office (DCPO) in 2013 for which he received back-to-back citations as 2012 PNP Senior Officer of the Year for Operations and 2013 PNP Achievement Award in the Field of Operations.

Dela Rosa attended the 212th Regular Session of the Federal Bureau of Investigation National Academy in Quantico, Virginia, and the International Police Cooperation Center in South Korea; the US Army Ranger School in Fort Benning, Georgia; Air Marshall Instructors Course by the Australian Federal Police; and SET Course at the Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.

He served various leadership positions in the command group of the PNP Intelligence Group from October 2013 to December 2014.

Since he became a policeman, dela Rosa is a recipient of 83 medals mostly on successful operations-related awards.
His latest successful operation was the rescue of Sally Chua who was kidnapped in Quezon City and taken to Davao City.
