---
title: Commissioner Christian Robert Lim's Resignation as Comelec Campaign Finance Officer
date: 2016-06-20T16:17:19UTC
excerpt: Commissioner Christian Robert Lim filed his irrevocable resignation as Comelec Campaign Finance Officer June 20, 2016.
layout: post
categories: [post]
tags: [comelec, election, soce, christian robert lim]
published: true
---

Commissioner Christian Robert Lim has filed his irrevocable resignation as Comelec Campaign Finance Officer (CFO) after the Comelec en banc extended the deadline of the filing of the Statement of Contributions and Expenditures (SOCE) up to June 30, 2016.
Lim previously recommended not to extend the deadline because it is against Republic Act 7166 Section 14 which states:

> Every candidate and treasurer of the political party shall, within thirty (30) days after the day of the election, file in duplicate with the offices of the Commission the full, true and itemized statement of all contributions and expenditures in connection with the election.

Lim also said that the extension of the deadline will be a violation of Comelec's own rules speaking of Comelec Resolution 9991 Rule 10, Section 2:

> Not later than thirty (30) days after the day of election, or by 08 June 2016, Wednesday, all candidates and parties who participated in the 09 May 2016 National and Local Elections, regardless of whether they won or lost, must file their Statements of Contributions and Expenditures (SOCEs) and the relevant Schedules and supporting documents. ...

Commissioner Lim is one of the three members of the Comelec en banc who voted against the deadline extension on June 16.
The other two who voted the same are Chairman Juan Andres Bautista and Commissioner Luie Tito Guia.
Those who voted in favor of the deadline extension are Commissioners Arthur Lim, Al Parreño, Sheriff Abas and Ma. Rowena Amelia Guanzon.

"Even in 2013, I was still fighting for a non-extendable rule. Di pumayag ang en banc kaya merong late penalty. But 2013 was experimental, 2016 was the culmination so now we are back to zero. Parang sayang lahat ng efforts," Lim explained.
