---
title: Inauguration of the 16th President
date: 2016-06-30T00:28:59UTC
excerpt: Inauguration of the 16th President of the Republic of the Philippines, Rodrigo Roa Duterte. He will be the first President of the country from Mindanao.
layout: post
categories: [news_top, news_article]
tags: [inauguration, president, duterte]
published: true
image:
  layout:
  source: https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/47611946/duterte/post/duterte_inauguration_20160630.png
  attribution: RTVM
video:
  layout: bottom
  source: WV_vUn33558
  attribution: RTVM
---

Today, 30 June 2016, is the inauguration of the 16th President of the Republic of the Philippines, Rodrigo Roa Duterte, which will be held at Rizal Hall, Malacañan Palace.
The event is scheduled to start 10:30 am and will end before 4:00 pm.
Earlier interview with incoming Presidential Communications Operations Office (PCOO) Secretary Martin Andanar, he said, there will likely be not more than 627 guests will attend.

The inauguration will be simple.
His attire, barong tagalog made from Mindanao silk by Melody Mae Parrel-Pimentel of Cagayan De Oro.
His barong was embroidered with a mini Philippine flag on the left side of the chest.

The food during the occassion are simple, like the lumpiang ubod (coconut pith spring roll), pandesal with kesong puti (white cheese made from unskimmed carabao’s milk) and Vigan longganisa (sausage from Northern Ilocandia) grilled on the spot, monggo soup mixed with smoked fish and alugbati (malabar spinach) in demitasse cups, fried saba (Carbava banana) slices, and Durian tartlet. For drinks, guests will have a choice between homegrown delights pine-mango cooler and dalandan juice.

After the inauguration, it will be a modest diplomatic reception, a far cry from the posh Vin d’Honneur.
In fact, the incoming president wants to prove to the Filipino people his campaign slogan of true reform and it will start from the first day of his term.

Rodrigo Duterte will be the first Asian President whose inauguration will be broadcasted through Facebook, the world's largest social network.
Only People's Television 4 (PTV-4) and Radio Television Malacanang (RTVM) will be covering the inauguration in Rizal Hall at Malacañan Palace.
"Other journalists who will cover the inauguration would be given a work station outside the Rizal Hall, probably at the New Executive Building," said incoming PCOO Secretary Martin Andanar.
Nine national broadcasting companies will also cover the event but will only be allowed inside the palace grounds of gate 4.
The full inauguration can be watched via the government television station PTV 4 and will be broadcast at the same time via live streaming at [http://www.ptv.ph/ptvlivestream](http://www.ptv.ph/ptvlivestream).
The official coverage will be done by the Radio TV Malacanang (RTVM) and will also broadcast it via live streaming at [http://rtvm.gov.ph/main/?p=40206](http://rtvm.gov.ph/main/?p=40206) beginning 8am today.
&nbsp;&#x25cf;
