---
title: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB)
date: 2016-12-06T08:00:01UTC
excerpt: The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank is a multilateral development bank conceived for the 21st century focusing on the development of infrastructure and other productive sectors in Asia.
layout: post
categories: [info, org]
tags: [multilateral development bank]
published: true
permalink: /info/kLjQGPEKb2J1z6g
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
sources:
  - label: Wikipedia
    link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asian_Infrastructure_Investment_Bank
  - label: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
    link: http://www.aiib.org/
---

## Wikipedia[^1]:

The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) is an international financial institution that aims to support the building of infrastructure in the Asia-Pacific region. The bank has 57 member states (all "Founding Members") and was proposed as an initiative by the government of China. The initiative gained support from 37 regional and 20 non-regional Prospective Founding Members (PFM), all of which have signed the Articles of Agreement that form the legal basis for the bank. The bank started operation after the agreement entered into force on 25 December 2015, after ratifications were received from 10 member states holding a total number of 50% of the initial subscriptions of the Authorized Capital Stock. Major economies that did not become PFM include the G7/G8 members' Japan and the United States, although Canada was accepted on 23 September 2016.

The United Nations has addressed the launch of AIIB as having potential for "scaling up financing for sustainable development" for the concern of global economic governance. The capital of the bank is $100 billion, equivalent to  2/3 of the capital of the Asian Development Bank and about half that of the World Bank.

The bank was proposed by China in 2013 and the initiative was launched at a ceremony in Beijing in October 2014.

## From AIIB Website[^2]:

The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) is a multilateral development bank (MDB) conceived for the 21st century. Through a participatory process, its founding members are developing its core philosophy, principles, policies, value system and operating platform. The Bank's foundation is built on the lessons of experience of existing MDBs and the private sector. Its modus operandi will be lean, clean and green: lean, with a small efficient management team and highly skilled staff; clean, an ethical organization with zero tolerance for corruption; and green, an institution built on respect for the environment. The AIIB will put in place strong policies on governance, accountability, financial, procurement and environmental and social frameworks.

The AIIB, a modern knowledge-based institution, will focus on the development of infrastructure and other productive sectors in Asia, including energy and power, transportation and telecommunications, rural infrastructure and agriculture development, water supply and sanitation, environmental protection, urban development and logistics, etc. The operational strategy and priority areas of engagement may be revised or further refined by its governing boards in the future as circumstances may warrant.

The AIIB will complement and cooperate with the existing MDBs such as Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and European Investment Bank to jointly address the daunting infrastructure needs in Asia. The Bank's openness and inclusiveness reflect its multilateral nature. AIIB welcomes all regional and non-regional countries, developing and developed countries, that seek to contribute to Asian infrastructure development and regional connectivity.

[^1]: Retrieved 6 December 2016.
[^2]: Retrieved 6 December 2016.
