---
title: 6.7 Earthquake Shook Surigao del Norte
date: 2017-02-11T20:10:50UTC
excerpt: A 6.7 magnitude earthquake shook Surigao del Norte with epicenter 16 kilometers northwest of Surigao City at 10:03 PM on 10 February 2017 causing the city to be placed under state of calamity.
author: Duterte Times
layout: post
categories: [news, other, disaster, earthquake]
tags: [Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, PHIVOLCS, National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council, NDRRMC]
published: true
permalink: /news/9rDR4g8KJoK1lwb
thumbnail:
image:
  layout: auto_width
  source: 
  attribution: 
video:
  source: 
  attribution: 
  layout: top
videos:
  - source: 
    attribution: 
    layout: 
sources:
  - label: Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
    link: http://www.phivolcs.dost.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=7074:primer-on-the-10-february-2017-magnitude-67-earthquake-at-surigao-del-norte&catid=60:latest-news&Itemid=19
  - label: NDRRMC Site Report (National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council)
    link: http://www.ndrrmc.gov.ph/attachments/article/3017/Sitrep_No_02_Re_Effects_of_Magnitude_6.7_Earthquake_in_Surigao_City_Surigao_Del_Norte_Issued_On_11Feb2017_at_8PM.pdf
  - label: At least 6 dead after 6.7-magitude earthquake rocks Surigao City (Philippine Information Agency)
    link: http://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/2761486795806
  - label: DSWD activates disaster teams in CARAGA region (Philippine Information Agency)
    link: http://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/1141486805721
  - label: PHIVOLCS Earthquake Intensity Levels
    link: http://www.gov.ph/laginghanda/phivolcs-earthquake-intensity-scale/
related:
---

According to the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), a 6.7 magnitude earthquake occured at 09.80 degrees north latitude and 125.35 degrees East latitude and 16 kilometers 77 degrees northwest of Surigao City, Surigao Strait at a depth of 10 kilometers at 10:03 PM on 10 February 2017 (PHT) caused by the movement of Surigao segment of the Philippine Fault.
Based on preliminary reports, the strongest ground shaking was felt in Surigao City with PHIVOLCS Earthquake Intensity Scale (PEIS) VII which is described as Destructive.
According to the NWS Pacific Tsunami Warning Center, there was no tsunami threat from the earthquake.
As of 4:00 PM of 11 February 2017, there were 101 aftershocks recorded by the PHIVOLCS seismic monitoring network.
Surigao City is placed under state of calamity on 11 February 2017.

PEIS VI (Very Strong) shaking occured in municipalities of Pintuyan in Southern Leyte, and San Francisco and Malimono in Surigao del Norte.
PEIS V (Strong) shaking occured in municipalities of Mainit and Placer in Surigao Del Norte, Libjo and San Jose in Dinagat Island, San Ricardo, Limasawa and San Francisco in Southern Leyte and Manduae City.
PEIS IV (Moderately Strong) to PEIS I (Scarcely Perceptible) occured 250 kilometers away from the epicenter; this include Butuan City, Ormoc City, Tacloban City, Catbalogan City, Bislig City, Cebu City, Cagayan De Oro City, Dumaguete City and Tagbilaran City.

The Philippine Information Agency (PIA) reported that there were six deaths identified on 11 February 2017 but time was not specified.
The six victims were Robert Eludo, Jr., JM Ariar, Lito Wilson, Lorenzo Deguino, Roda Justina Taganahan and Wenefreda Aragon Bernal.
Causes of death include blunt trauma, heart attack and hit by collapsing wall.
108 were reported injured in Surigao City, Surigao del Norte.

The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) Site Report 2 says there were four deaths as of 8:00 PM of 11 February 2017 but no identities mentioned.
The report says 109 incurred injuries; 77 in Caraga Regiona Hospital, 21 in Surigao Medical Center, 8 in Miranda Family Hospital and 3 in Malimono District Hospital.

Municipality of San Francisco and Malimono, Surigao del Norte has total blackout while Surigao City has partial power failure.

There were 6 bridges and 5 roads damaged in Surigao del Norte.
Anaon-aon Bridge collapsed and not passable.
Malico and Kinabutan Bridges along Maharlika Highway in barangay Rizal, Surigao City are passable to light vehicles only.

Bridges along the national highway going to Lipata suffered serious damages.
Vehicles in and out of Lipata Ferry Terminal are diverted to Surigao City Port.
Lipata Ferry Terminal has been temporarily closed.
All sea vessels and port operations in Lipata Ferry Terminal were transferred to Surigao City Port.

Surigao City Domestic Airport runway incurred damages.
The Surigao City Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP) officer-in-charge Engr. Junelito Abrazado declared in the morning of 11 February 2017 the suspension of all flights in Surigao City.

The Surigao City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (DRRMO) with Special Rescue Unit of Bureau of Fire and Protection, 30th IB, Phil. Army and Surigao City Incident Management Team conducted search and rescue operations in barangay Poctoy, Surigao City.

The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) National Response Cluster and DSWD-DREAMB is on red alert effective 5:00 PM of 11 February 2017.
DSWD Central Office, CARAGA Office and National Resource Operations Center have 109,501 Family Food Packs (FFPs) and available Food and Non-Food Items (FNFIs) amounting to Php124,055,601.88.
DSWD is conducting an ongoing validation of affected families in CARAGA.

The Eastern Mindanao Command (EASTMINCOM) has been mobilized to help in the rescue and disaster response operations.

The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) had deployed personnel and equipment for clearing operations.

The Regional and Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Councils are conducting assigned operations and other support teams are ready on standby.
&#x25cf;
